How's things out in California? Weather holding up out there? Weather looks
nice. It's getting a little windy and a little cooler. Yeah. It's getting kind
of crisp here, too. Okay. I want to ask you a few questions about things in
general and about some of the specific works, too, maybe. First of all, I... let
me make sure that my tape machine is rolling in yonder. Are we rolling? Rolling.
Okay. First of all, do you classify yourself as a hard science writer with
stories, for the most part, having a strong scientific base? If you've got to
classify me, that's where I fit, yes. I would, uh, I suppose all writers resist
classification as best they can. I do other things, too. Fantasy, considerable
fantasy, a great deal more hard science fiction, not much in the way of soft
science fiction. Uh, articles, speeches I'm the guy who did a Uh, study of the
medical problems of breeding Kryptonians Called Man of Steel, Woman of Kleenex
And I just published The only venture I've ever made into economics A method
which would also solve the problem of nuclear waste disposal Maybe you saw it in
Omni Mm-hmm The idea is to turn the nuclear waste into coins a healthy economy
is one in which the money circulates fast. Uh-huh. You mentioned that you didn't
write much of soft science fiction. Do you think that the new wave is past back
to strong science-oriented stories, or is that a good thing? Yes, I do. However,
the new wave was very good to me. when i was first getting started i was the
only new hard science fiction writer the new wave is a very persuasive thing uh
and very easy to use to justify bad stories i think that's what killed it not
not that uh not that increased characterization and experiments with uh
typography and story format are a bad thing in themselves It's so easy to use
New Wave to justify a bad story. It was bound to glass. How did you begin
writing science fiction? Have you always been a science fiction reader or fan?
Yes. Presently I found I was making up, I was daydreaming stories that seemed
worth writing. Did you tell the stories before you began to get to where you
could write them down? Yes I've been a storyteller all my life.
You must have a large, i know you have a large fan group do they keep in contact
with you regularly do you write ever for the fans or do you just write what you
want to write? I mostly write for myself. For an imaginary reader who resembles
me a great deal. Only he needs things explained to him. um... beyond that uh, I
sell it where I can and pick up readers where I can."
I might ask you here a little bit about the known space series, uh, how did that
begin, and how did you get involved in a future history? Well, there had been
future histories around, Poole Andersons and Robert Heinlein. And I tell you, I
guess we each evolve the idea somewhat independently. And the idea is that if
you carved out a consistent, workable future, it seems a shame to waste it on
one story. You put in the background because you want the... You want the
background of a story to seem bigger than it is. So there are things that are
simply unexplained.
And if you think of more to say on a given subject, why, you go with it. And if
you think of a story that fits into the background of a previous story and
allows you to elaborate on that background, sometimes you fall in love with the
background. And presently, you've got a bunch of stories that link.
You said that, ah, your future history was finished when you wrote The Ringworld
Engineers and the Afterwards. Is that still true? And if so, why? Oh, I've given
up saying that the, uh, that the No, in Space series is dead. There's just no
point in it. I've written five books worth of No in Space stories since I said
that. and besides that, I have no doubt that I'll come up with stories said in
Gilded Arms time. I like writing science fiction detective stories. It's just
hard work. I do not have a detective story in my head. It'll have to emerge. But
that's the beginning of known space, and I'll continue to work with it where it
looks like fun. You've written, like you said, some science detective stories.
and also some other areas, is there any area or any subject that can't be done
for science fiction that you think of?
No, I can't think of any. I guess I go along with the idea that there are these
interlocked circles to represent various areas of fiction and they all swim in
the sea of fantasy. Science fiction probably includes the entire portion of
fantasy that is possible. And mainstream would be somewhere in there, nurse
novels would be somewhere in that. You follow? A-ha! There would be no subject
you can treat in English that couldn't be treated in a science fiction format,
except fantasy, and that would be treated in a fantasy format. I see. I
understand that in Ringworld that's... Well, first of all, let me ask you, how
did the Ringworld itself, the concept, come about? Oh, I ran across the concept
Dyson sphere. Dyson, the mathematician, came up with the concept Dyson shell,
and he was misunderstood to some extent, so presently I ran across an article
about Dyson spheres. Picture that as a golf ball, 93 million miles in radius,
with a sun at the center. And gravity generators all around the outside, so you
would live on the inside. Terraform it with oceans and soil and air. I ran
across that, and I didn't like it. I thought it could be improved, and I wound
up with the ringworld. I believe he mentioned somewhere that Mr. Dyson or
someone had thought that maybe a whole bunch of small ringworlds would be
superior to the one large one. That was Freeman Dyson's reaction. I believe I
gave an acceptable answer to that in the ringworld engineers. But in general,
he'd be right. It's just that the Ringworld engineers in particular are people
who like dependable weapons of huge size. I understand that some fans pointed
out errors in the Ringworld, the original novel. That's right. What were the
basic errors? How did you correct them? through the...
And rapidly, some MIT people demonstrated that the Ringworld was unstable, and
they were chanting it in the halls at the Next Worldcon. The Ringworld is
unstable. The Ringworld is unstable.
It still took about seven years for anyone to figure out the exact numbers for
the instability, and they are horrifying. The Ringworld, a major solar flare
would have the Ringworld grinding against its sun in five years.
Well, I work it in the plot. That was one elaboration, or error. Another just
can't be correct. It seems that there's too much twilight with the shadow
squares set up the way I have them set up. You get too much of neither day nor
night but twilight. Half the sun's showing, part of the sun's showing. The
shadow squares ought to be set up with about five big shadow squares. moving in
a retrograde world. That way you get day and night setting much faster when it
sets. Terminator line moves like a bat out of hell. It's still a little fuzzy,
but it doesn't matter. Third point. Somebody pointed out that the tensile
strength necessary to hold the ringworld together is on the order of the
tensile strength of an atomic nucleus. because it's the super strong force.
Okay, I can live with that. I can postulate that I knew Sgrift would have to be
stronger than any normal material already. Ah, fourth point. Some uh... A high
school class in Florida got to work on the Ringworld and their conclusion was
that the Ringworld's worst problem is that all the topsoil would wind up in the
oceans in about 3000 years. There are no earthquakes on the, uh, ringworld. No
mountain building forces. Okay, uh, that's a tough one. I set up a spill pipe
system that runs the top, that runs the sea bottom muck from the sea bottoms
under the ringworld and up over the edge of the rim wall. that even allows you
some some mind accumulation of useful metals what else shaking in my head I find
Frank Gasparek's suggestion that a machine building culture on the ringworld
which reached our level wouldn't have any petroleum products to use they would
wind up using alcohol of where we use gasoline. And fine, I can live with that.
As a matter of fact, the sludge from making alcohol for automobiles, the sludge
can be used to make plastics, maybe plastic-like substances, maybe the chemicals
are just as elaborate as the residues from petroleum. It's Watson? Yeah. What
else? Still checking in my head I pick up on other things I can't use, such as
Dan Alterson's solar system, which involves four ringworlds. He's got three
ringworlds about the size of mine rotating orthogonally on frictionless
bearings. And the fourth ringworld is about the size of the orbit of Jupiter
and inhabited by mesclonites. Mesclinites derived from a novel by Hal Clement,
Mission of Gravity. And mesclinites require cold temperatures about those of the
orbit of Jupiter, as opposed to Jupiter, which has an internal heat source. Cold
temperatures and heavy gravity. So his fourth ringworld is the size of the
orbit of Jupiter and spinning like a bat out of hell. I had it figured out that
if they spun that ringworld any faster it would get nearer the speed of light
and contract Dan says I've misunderstood relativity it would not contract OK I
still haven't figured out why not
you obviously enjoy playing the game as how Clement calls it between your own
scientific knowledge and that of your readers and peers absolutely I
incorporated everything that sounded good that I could use in redesign, in
elaborating the design of the ringworld what do you think about the current
ideas being proposed by Gerard O'Neill and others for space habitats I think
they are grandiose and I certainly wouldn't stop him but the space program seems
to have fallen flat on its space at this point we will have trouble reaching the
Moon. Again, getting back to the Moon is as big a problem as we can face. I
resent having to say that, but I believe it's true.
How do you go about constructing aliens with particular reference to the Motes,
to the Moties? Were you influenced by anyone in that area? The Moties was, no,
not in that case. In that case, I had the idea that I was following a
progression with a protozoan, with an amoeba. You get radial symmetry inside and
out. Move up a goodly distance and you find starfishes with radial symmetry on
the outside and bilateral symmetry on the inside. Move up a little further you
find flat worms and worms of all stamps at the level of bilateral symmetry
inside and out. Go as far as a human, you find bilateral symmetry on the outside
and no symmetry, well, half symmetrical on the inside. The lungs look
symmetrical, the kidneys look symmetrical, the intestines look like somebody
dropped a plate of spaghetti. I tried to move on to the next step, bilaterally
unsymmetrical on the outside. And I got the original Motie, which was the
engineer for him. But I always design aliens for themselves. I almost never
design an alien to match a story. The story, some story will eventually include
the alien. The alien stands for himself. How did you come up with the concept of
cowardice embodied in the Firestone Puppeteers? Well, it just seemed an idea
worth exploring. I think one of the outstanding aspects on the Moties, back to
them for a minute, was the non-use of standardized parts and machines. They
built whatever they needed on the spot. Yeah. Do you recall what made you think
along those lines? I was just playing along. I was just playing with ideas at
that point, and that one seemed like a fun one. It also seemed likely enough. If
you've got a critter with not much intelligence except in the direction of tool
making and tool altering, then why not? The thing has to keep testing its
ability or it will lose it. It might as well be designing something every time
it needs a specific machine.
Master can always stop it and have it producing as if by assembly line. And if a
master needs a lot of somethings fast.
One other specific question, and this jumps back to Ringworld a moment, was
concerning the Teela Brown gene. Was this more or less a story gimmick, or were
you extrapolating on the evolution of humanity there? Oh, partly that and partly
you've got to remember the time I was writing you. I was damn sick and tired of
psychic powers showing up in stories. I did not believe in psychic powers at
that time. I've been told they look pretty good now but at the time I conceived
the Teela Brown gene as being the ultimate psychic power which you may interpret
either as lucky or as author-controlled.
And in that sense, it was something of a put-on. Except that I can believe
almost anything while I'm writing the story. And I am able to extrapolate. So if
Teela Brown is lucky, certain things emerge. And if she's just a statistical
fluke, then something else emerges. and that's that people will interpret
anything that happens to her as lucky.
Defending their preconceptions.
What do you consider to be your best work or your favorite work? No, I couldn't
tell you that. There is no way I can name a favorite work. The whole... My
career is a progression for one thing. take any novel or any important short
story even out of that progression and it wanders away in a different direction.
So I don't think I have a favorite story, but I suppose I can name In Constant
Moon, which is virtually the only strictly love story I've ever done. And I
suppose I could name Lucifer's Hammer, which made me the most money. though
Mote in God's Eye may beat that I suppose I could name oh man of steel woman of
Kleenex which has gotten me the most laugh I suppose everybody seems to have
read it and those who haven't have heard about it a cocktail party
or what Jerry Pournelle and I just recently They wrote the last 10 minutes for a
movie that had a good 90 minutes followed by a bad last 10 minutes. And the last
I've heard is they're not gonna make the movie, which is a dirty shame. That is,
they're not gonna make the last 10 minutes hour away. They're gonna fiddle with
what they've got. And that's a really dirty shame. What they've got is garbage.
I really hope they use that last 10 minutes and if they do, I will get
considerable enjoyment out of that and that'll be my favorite, you name it. You
mentioned your collaboration with Jerry Pournelle. Which do you prefer, writing
alone, or with another person like that? I prefer variety.
Variety? In fact, I even prefer variety in my collaborators. I had just finished
a novel with a Stephen Barnes, and we're starting another... a short one. And
Jerry and I are starting another, almost instantly. It's a novel about, uh,
well, we've designed an alien that could invade the Earth and also would want
to... It's tough to get an alien whom you could believe would want to invade the
Earth from another star, considering the distances involved and the energies
involved and the penalties for failure and the lack of... the unlikelihood that
it will do your home planet any good if you conquer something that is six light
years away. Anyway, we've designed one, and we will be writing a novel about
that. When you collaborate with someone like that, who does what job? Do you get
involved with being hard to decide who does what? It's hard sometimes, but it
always resolves. The question is who is most qualified to write a given scene
that we have both decided needs writing. Okay? Before we start, we have the
novel all laid out. We know what's going in virtually everywhere. And if we
don't, it feels like we do. And if we find out we don't, we elaborate as we get
to that section. Okay, the next question is who is qualified to write a given
scene? Sometimes it's obvious. If we're dealing with a madman, he's mine. If
we're dealing with military operations, it's Jerry's. Aliens are generally mine.
Politics is generally Jerry's. Knowledge of history is generally Jerry's. And a
real evil son of a bitch, Jerry usually creates him, and I usually run with him
afterwards. because Jerry has a lot of textbooks on psychology and a Ph.D. in
psychology, for that matter. Sorry, doctorate in psychology. And when he's
created a really evil son of a bitch, he just hates him too much to work with
him. I can easily do something. Horace Barry went that way, and The Rapist in
Lucifer's Hammer. And a couple of the characters in Inferno.
I understand that both you and Mr. Pournelle use word processors. How does that aid
in your writing? It makes first draft a little faster. But it makes corrections
enormously faster. You get a more polished novel when I'm using a word
processor. It's polishing is just like sinking into the machine, almost.
The word processor behaves like a magic typewriter, it does everything you would
want a typewriter to do only it can't. It can't erase whole blocks of print at a
time and then straighten up the page so it looks like you never made any
corrections, but a word processor can do just that. And move blocks up and down
the page, I'll put down the manuscript.
A somewhat more grandiose question. I suppose, what do you think is the future
of science fiction? Is fantasy taking over or do you see, foresee a lot of hard
science fiction to come? Hard to say. ... For one thing, uh, writers in general
don't take orders worth a damn. The science fiction field is galloping off in
all directions just as it always has. And the reader will make the final
decision in most cases. What will be successful, it will depend on who buys what
books. That's always been true.
I know that some of your works were involved with the animated Star Trek
episodes a few years back. How did that start? Did you... Oh, it went like this.
They were going to start a Star Trek cartoon, and the lady story editor got me
involved. I tried to give them a story that involved a mini black hole and an
outsider ship. You remember the outsiders from known space? Certainly. I had the
idea that Star Trek had been using men in rubber suits for so long that they
wouldn't realize how much more freedom they had with the animated version. That
turns out not to be the case. They had some very good aliens in there. But that
story turned out to be a little over the heads of their intended audience. So I
want... It did incidentally wind up as the first version of the last part of a
story called The Borderlands Soul. so I eventually wound up meeting Gene
Roddenberry and he wound up suggesting why don't I take a story called the soft
weapon and turn it into a start into a Star Trek version and I did that and
called it the slaver weapon and fine they eventually made a cartoon out of it
they also sold the right to turn that cartoon script into a story. They sold
that to Ballantine. I got mildly upset. The president of the SFWA, who was
Jerry Pournelle at the time, got seriously upset and started making as many waves
as he could. And what eventually happened was that they sent me a dollar, a
check for two dollars and something, something cents. Somewhere between two and
three dollars. and jerry i don't know where the negotiations went but jerry
wound up saying okay that defends the principle of the thing uh we'll ask for
more next time and that's that for some years by by then i had written to
Ballantine and gotten a letter from Betty Ballantine saying hey we we won't ever
use it we promise we see you're upset we promise we won't ever do anything with
this But a little later, the Ballantines got out of the Ballantine books
business and into the business of printing illustrated stuff. And Judy-Lynn Del
Rey wound up in charge. And presently I'm being offered $2,000 as advisor to
Alan Dean Foster, who will turn my script into a novel. And I said, fine, when
what I really meant was acceptable. ...a few months later I've got a letter from
Judy-Lynn dropping the price to $500 and I blew my top. I said A, I won't
collaborate with with uh you or Alan on anything of the kind and B, you may not
use anything from Known Space except what's in the script... and that is the way
it happened. Alan did not use anything except what was in the script which
involve Cinty, and the history of the slavers, and the stasis box. Are there any
plans for motion picture, television verses of any of your works in the future?
Yes, there are. I just don't know how far they are going to go. But there is a
group that owns an option on death by ecstasy. And a guy who owns an option on
the Mote in God's eye, And, let's see, I've got a friend trying to get a public
broadcasting system to make a TV version of Lucifer of Inconstant Moon, which
would be nice, all of which would be nice. Are there any contemporary science
fiction writers that you particularly admire or consider good writers? Yes, a
great many. Any in particular you'd like to mention? Sure. Ursula Le Guin. John
Varley. Poul Anderson. Jerry Pournelle.
How far do we go with this? I like the old ones and I like the new ones. I like
about half of Harlan Ellison's stories.
which is a better record than many writers have I like a few of Phil Dick's
stories and I will probably buy the class of the Dorsai books by Gordon Dickson in
fact it's damn certain I will read it I'll buy it if it doesn't come free I get
swamped in free books you know
I'm a Piers Anthony fan. I don't know how numerous we Piers Anthony fans are. I
like the puzzles in his books. And his books are always jammed with puzzles and
new ways of thinking. And so forth.
Yeah, his spell for chameleon stuff is great too. Love that. That really runs
about the gamut of my questions here. Well, one last question I might ask you. I
don't suppose those puppeteers ever sneaked you the formula for that general
product's hold, did they? No, I don't have the formula for the general product's
hold, but I have reason to suspect that there are puppeteers on Earth. look at
the characteristics forget the shape they must be masters of biology to hide
that peculiar three-legged two-headed shape but consider their characteristics
they are cowards that is, they want everything utterly safe no corners on
anything everything is soft surfaces around the puppeteer world they don't even
keep their world near a sun regarding it as a runaway fusion reactor which of
course it is. So, desperate regard for safety, plus an urge to meddle in the
lifestyles of other species driving urge to meddle with practically no
restraints attached. What does that remind you of? It seems nearly certain to me
that Ralph Nader is a Pearson Spokin' here.
That's correct. Is there anything else you might have that you'd like to say to
some the radio listeners here, that would be interested in science fiction?
I guess not. Certainly I have a great deal to say to them. They can read it in
my book. It's easier that way anyway. I talked first draft. You've heard me
stuttering. I'd prefer they read what I wrote. That they get perfected to some
extent. Now, it's been a real pleasure speaking with you tonight. Appreciate
very much your time on this. That's okay. I love talking about myself. I get a
lot of Raiders left. Well, we appreciate it. We enjoy hearing you talk too. And
thank you again for your time. We'll try to get a copy of this tape to you as
soon as we can get it edited around. Hello. Okay, thank you very much. That's me
on this end. Okay, you're cutting this out. Okay, go ahead. I'll take it on this
end. There we go. I haven't got it. Yeah, I was... I got it in here. Go ahead
and hang up, Dave. Okay, bye-bye. Bye. I've got it. Mr. Niven, this is David
Carson again. Could I ask you one question? Mr. Niven? Hello?
Yeah, we lost him.
Hello? Hello? Mr. Niven? Yes? We lost you on the phone there. This is David
Carson with the science fiction network. radio show again? Yep. I was just
calling to uh to see if you still had time to talk with our sci-fi class uh this
Thursday November the sixth. Just a second if you've asked me before I probably
noted it down, no I haven't noted it down that space is cleared. What time do
you want? We'll call you uh almost the same time about five minute at about
fifteen minutes after 5 your time. The class starts at 7 o'clock our time so
that should be perfect. It will be 5-15 your time.
Ok. Listen we certainly do appreciate this and we will be sending you a copy of
the completed tape and we will be putting one on file with the science fiction
research association. Ok good. Good. Yeah, we just joined up with them about a
week or two ago, and they sent us a little request and won all of our tapes, so
we decided we'd send them some non-broadcast copies of the tapes to them. Good
enough. Excuse me, that was Thursday, the 6th of November? Yes, sir. Good. I
have this nasty habit of putting it down on the wrong day. Yeah. Okay. Okay, the
class has about, depending upon how alert they are, there'll be between 10 to 20
people there, and we won't take up more than about 30 minutes of your time.
Okay. They're reading your novel Ringworld for part of the class, and that's
what they'll be asking you questions on. Okay. There are, mostly, they're just
some average readers, they read a lot of stuff, and there are a few ardent
science fiction fans who will try and restrain. Okay.